Back to back meetings through the day.
I wish I had coffee.
Let me open Blinkit.
9 minutes. That's how long it take for
somebody to receive a signal, go into a
store, find the item, pack it, give it
to a rider [music] who comes and
delivers it. Wow, that sounds like
magic. Let me unpack the tech [music]
stack of the $10 million quick commerce
giant. Let's dive in.
>> [music]
>> First, you have to understand the
physics. Traditional e-commerce like
Amazon or Flipkart operate on a hub and
spoke model, which involves giant
200,000 sq ft warehouses 50 km outside
the city. That's why you wait for a day
or two. Blinkit destroys [music] this
model. They don't see the city as a map,
they see it as a mesh of polygons. They
divide the entire city into small
geometric zones and each polygon has a
strict rule. The delivery time from the
center to the extreme edge [music]
cannot exceed 10 minutes. Here's the
growth hack. If demand in a polygon
rises and delivery time slip to 12
minutes, they don't just hire more
drivers. [music]
They physically split the polygon in
half and open a new dark store in the
new zone. [music] Cellular mitosis, but
for logistics. Now, let's talk about the
mold, the dark store. [music] Blinkit
has over 60 of these in Bangalore alone.
These aren't warehouses, they're 2,000
sq ft micro-fulfillment centers.
>> [music]
>> That's the size of a large three-bedroom
apartment. Inside, they hold 6,000 SKUs,
but unlike Amazon which uses robots,
Blinkit uses muscle memory. Because the
space is so small and the clock is
ticking, robots are actually too slow. A
human picker knows exactly where the
items are. They use an algorithm called
FIFO, first expired, first out. The app
directs the picker to grab the items
that expire soonest, ensuring efficiency
and reducing waste. The picker packs
this in under 60 seconds. But, how do
they hold inventory for hundreds of
stores? This is where the mother
warehouse comes in. [music] For every 40
to 50 dark stores, there's one massive
mother warehouse, which is about 150,000
sq ft. The mother feeds the kids. They
use predictive [music] AI to restock the
dark stores every night based on what
you're going to order the next day.
Okay, that's the physical layer. Now,
let's look at the software layer. How do
you handle 50,000 requests per second
without the service catching on fire?
Well, Blinkit isn't a monolith. It's a
distributed system running on
microservices like Java, Go, and Python,
everything orchestrated by Kubernetes.
But, here's the hardest problem in quick
[music] commerce. It's not delivery,
it's concurrency. Imagine there's
exactly one packet of blue lace chips
left [music] in the dark store and me
and my neighbor Rahul both hit pay at
the exact same millisecond. Who gets it?
If you use the standard SQL database,
both payments might go through, but
there's only one bag. One of us is going
to be very angry and hungry. To solve
this, they use Redis. Redis is an
in-memory [music] data store, it lives
in RAM and operates in microseconds.
They use distributed locking and the
moment I hit checkout, the system pings
Redis, puts a mutex lock on the specific
item for 3 minutes. Even if the main
database hasn't been updated yet, Redis
knows that the bag is locked. Optimistic
locking at scale. Next, the data pipe.
You can't run a 10-minute business if
your data takes 2 hours to arrive.
That's like driving a Ferrari using a
map from 1995. Blinkit uses Apache
Kafka. It's the central nervous system.
Rider location, Kafka stream. Inventory
update, Kafka stream. Rains in
Koramangala, Kafka stream. Speaking of
rain, they don't just trust Google Maps
either. They use Zomato's weather
infrastructure called Weather Union. If
it starts raining in just one polygon,
the system knows before Google does. The
algorithm instantly adds a rain buffer
to the ETA and surges the price to
[music] balance demand. And they use S2
geometry by Google Maps, where they
divide the world into mathematical cells
to calculate time to park, time to climb
stairs, etc. [music] Yes, they do track
how long it takes to go up the elevator.
Finally, the prediction layer. Blinkit
uses gradient boosting machines and
neural networks to predict the future.
They call this the slot intelligence.
The model looks at weird inputs. Is it
raining? Demand for tea goes up 300%. Is
it an India versus Pakistan cricket
match? Demand for chips and Coke spikes.
Is it Valentine's Day? Flowers move to
the front of the store. The AI predicts
the surge before even it happens. If the
model [music] sees a storm coming, it
tells the mother warehouse to send extra
onions to the dark store. By the time
you open the app to order soup, the
onions are already there. Amazon reacts
to your order, Blinkit anticipates it.
They also use a brilliant piece of
psychological engineering. Notice that
when the rider is about 100 m away, the
map stops showing the time and just
says, "Arriving soon." [music] That is a
UI hack. GPS is jittery at the last 100
m. If the dot jumps around, you get
anxious. By switching to text, they buy
the rider a 30-second buffer to find
your door without you panicking. All of
this, the microservices, the Redis
locking, the S2 geometry, the neural
nets, all has to execute in under 200
milliseconds. If the latency is higher
than that, the app feels sluggish and
then you go to Zepto or Instamart.
But, Blinkit algorithm works.
While I enjoy my cold brew,
follow Hackonomics for more such
interesting insights.